Document how changelog maintenance works (#4579)
oscar-system/Oscar.jl: docs/src/DeveloperDocumentation/changelog.md

# Updating `CHANGELOG.md`

> Before every release, `CHANGELOG.md` should be updated. Most of this is ideally taken care

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before every release, `CHANGELOG.md` should be updated. Most of this is ideally taken care of
```

Reviewer 2: I'd say "ideally" should also be moved to the beginning of the sentence.

Author: ```suggestion
Before every release, `CHANGELOG.md` should be updated. Ideally most of this is taken care of
```

by automation, provided PR labels were sensibly set. The following labels explain which
labels we use; how people who create or merge PRs should set the labels; and how to
perform the actual update.

## How we use pull request labels to organize the changelog

The script `dev/releases/release_notes.py` will generate updates to `CHANGELOG.md`
automatically, based on PRs merged after the previous release, and what those PRs are

> labelled. We have the following labels, along with how they are meant to be applied

Reviewer: ```suggestion
labelled. We have the following labels, along with how they are meant to be applied.
```

| optimization                  | Performance improvements or improved testing |
| bug: crash                    | Fixed bugs that could lead to crashes |
| bug                           | Other fixed bugs |
| documentation                 | Improvements or additions to documentation |
| package: AbstractAlgebra      | Changes related to the package AbstractAlgebra |
| package: AlgebraicSolving     | Changes related to the package AlgebraicSolving |
| package: GAP                  | Changes related to the package GAP |
| package: Hecke                | Changes related to the package Hecke |
| package: Nemo                 | Changes related to the package Nemo |
| package: Polymake             | Changes related to the package Polymake |
| package: Singular             | Changes related to the package Singular |

## How to set labels when submitting or reviewing a PR

Everyone submitting a PR should ideally follow this checklist if they also have the access
rights for assigning labels. If they don't, they should ideally leave instructions that
indicate which labels to set, and a PR reviewer should then perform the following steps.

> 1. If your PR should *not* appear in the changelog, assign the `release notes: not needed` label and stop here.

Reviewer 2: I'm not a native speaker but I think this could potentially be misunderstood. I'd suggest to rephrase this to something like this:
```suggestion
1. If your PR is *not* supposed to appear in the changelog, assign the `release notes: not needed` label and stop here.
```

2. If possible, edit the title of your PR to be usable as an entry in the changelog, and assign the `release notes: use title` label.
   - Hint: Try to start the title with a verb in present tense such as "Add", "Enhance", "Remove".

>    - Hint: if function or type names appear in the title, surround them by backticks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Hint: If function or type names appear in the title, surround them by backticks.
```

3. If you need a longer description than fits into the title, leave a comment with your suggestion
   for this description, and assign the `release notes: to be added` label.

> 4. In either case, also assign at least one `topic: XYZ` label, and possible some of the other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. In either case, also assign at least one `topic: XYZ` label, and possibly some of the other
```

>    labels describe in the previous section as you deem fit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   labels described in the previous section as you deem fit.
```

Optionally, if you think your change is exceptionally noteworthy, also assign the

> `release notes: highlight` label.

Author: In practice I think this is the most critical section for our PR submitters (at least those who can set labels) and reviewers. So please everyone read and check this bit most carefully.

## Example

> For example, if the is a PR with title `Bump GAP.jl to 0.13`, and labels `package: GAP` and

Reviewer: Something seems to be missing between "the" and "is".

Reviewer 2: Perhaps it should read:
```suggestion
For example, if the change is a PR with title `Bump GAP.jl to 0.13`, and labels `package: GAP` and
```

`release notes: use title`, it would show up in the changelog file as

    ### Changes related to the package GAP
    
    - [#4421](https://github.com/oscar-system/Oscar.jl/pull/4421) Bump GAP.jl to 0.13

## Updating the changelog

> There are two ways update the changelog: by invoking the script directly, or by triggering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to update the changelog: by invoking the script directly, or by triggering
```

a GitHub workflow.

### Changelog Script

The script is located at `dev/releases/release_notes.py`. It must be run from
inside the `dev/releases` directory. Running it updates `CHANGELOG.md`, for review.

### GitHub Workflow

There is a GitHub workflow which runs the `release_notes.py` script and turns the result

> into a pull request. Anyone with write permission to the OSCAR repository can used it by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
into a pull request. Anyone with write permission to the OSCAR repository can use it by
```

visiting <https://github.com/oscar-system/Oscar.jl/actions/workflows/changelog.yml>, then
selecting the "Run workflow" button. This should open a little drop down, offering to
select a branch (usually this should be left at the default `master`). Click the green
"Run worklow" button to start the process.

After running a bit, this will either open a new PR against `master`, or update an

> existing PR created previously by it. This suggest the following usage pattern: run the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
existing PR created previously by it. This suggests the following usage pattern: run the
```

workflow to create an initial PR, and inspect it. If the result is not satisfactory (e.g.
because it contains uncategorized entries, or entries with typos, unclear language,

> formatting issues, etc., one can simply adjust the titles of those PRs, and then re-run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
formatting issues, etc.), one can simply adjust the titles of those PRs, and then re-run
```

# Updating `CHANGELOG.md`

Before every release, `CHANGELOG.md` should be updated. Most of this is ideally
taken care by automation, provided PR labels were sensibly set. The following
labels explain which labels we use; how people who create or merge PRs should
set the labels; and how to perform the actual update.

## How we use pull request labels to organize the changelog

> The script [release_notes.py](../../../dev/releases/release_notes.py) will generate updates to 

Author: ```suggestion
The script `dev/releases/release_notes.py` will generate updates to 
```

| topic: algebraic geometry | Changes related to Algebraic Geometry |
| topic: combinatorics | Changes related to Combinatorics |
| topic: FTheoryTools | Changes related to F-Theory Tools |
| topic: groups | Changes related to Groups |
| topic: LieTheory | Changes related to Lie Theory |
| topic: number theory | Changes related to Number Theory |
| topic: polyhedral geometry | Changes related to Polyhedral Geometry |
| topic: rings | Changes related to Rings |
| topic: schemes | Changes related to Schemes |
| topic: toric schemes | Changes related to Toric Schemes |
| topic: toric varieties | Changes related to Toric Varieties |
| topic: tropical geometry | Changes related to Tropical Geometry |
| bug: crash | Fixed bugs that could lead to crashes |
| bug | Other fixed bugs |
| documentation | Improvements or additions to documentation |

## Example

For example, if you have a PR titled `Bump GAP.jl to 0.13`, and labelled it `package: GAP`, and
`release notes: use title`, it would show up in the changelog file as

    ### Changes related to the package GAP
    
    - [#4421](https://github.com/oscar-system/Oscar.jl/pull/4421) Bump GAP.jl to 0.13

> 
> ## Suggestions for categorizing pull requests
> 
> todo ? Or is the above enough ?

Author: ```suggestion
```
Let's add this when we feel the need based on experience using this setup, not before

## Updating the changelog

> There are two ways update the changelog: invoking the script directly, or calling the github action.

Author: ```suggestion
There are two ways update the changelog: by invoking the script directly, or by triggering a GitHub workflow.
```

### Changelog Script

> The script is located at
> [../../../dev/releases/release_notes.py](../../../dev/releases/release_notes.py). Running it will
> update `CHANGELOG.md`, for review.

Author: ```suggestion
The script is located at `dev/releases/release_notes.py`. Running it will
update `CHANGELOG.md`, for review.
```

> ### Github Workflow

Author: ```suggestion
### GitHub Workflow
```

> There is a github CI workflow at
> https://github.com/oscar-system/Oscar.jl/actions/workflows/changelog.yml . This will run the script,
> and automatically make a PR against `master`, updating the changelog. If there is an already open
> PR by the workflow, running it again will update this PR.

Author: ```suggestion
There is a GitHub workflow which runs the `release_notes.py` script and turns the
result into a pull request. Anyone with write permission to the OSCAR repository
can used it by visiting
<https://github.com/oscar-system/Oscar.jl/actions/workflows/changelog.yml>, then
selecting the "Run workflow" button. This should open a little drop down, offering to select a branch (usually this should be left at the default `master`). Click the
green "Run worklow" button to start the process.

After running a bit, this will either open a new PR against `master`, or update
an existing PR created previously by it. This suggest the following usage pattern:
run the workflow to create an initial PR, and inspect it. If the result is not
satisfactory (e.g. because it contains uncategorized entries, or entries with typos, unclear language, formatting issues, etc., one can simply adjust the titles of those PRs, and then re-run the workflow. Repeat as needed.
```
